JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
the first primary day with just
one Republican
running for president, as West
Virginians
choose between two Democrats.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Also ahead
this Tuesday:
RODRIGO DUTERTE, Philippine
President-Elect:
I would like to reach my hand to
my opponents.
Let us begin the healing now.
HARI SREENIVASAN: A look at the
new likely
president of the Philippines,
Rodrigo Duterte,
and how his tough-talking, shock
politics
may shape a new era for the
country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what happens
when you combine
a day care center with a nursing
home? One
Seattle-based residence is
finding the benefits
of creating a space for young
and old alike.
HARRIET THOMPSON, Senior
Citizen: This is
what makes me happy. And you get
to know them,
and watch them, and act silly
with them. It's
good to feel like you're 3 years
old again.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The presidential
primary season
is winding toward a close with
two of the
final states taking their turns
tonight.
West Virginia has 29 Democratic
delegates
to offer. Overall, Hillary
Clinton needs just
155 more to lock up the party's
nomination.
Republicans have races today in
both West
Virginia and Nebraska, even
though the outcomes
are now just a formality.
It was West Virginians' turn to
head to the
polls today, but the candidates
were elsewhere.
Donald Trump, a near lock to be
the Republican
nominee, was in New York,
reportedly working
to join forces with the
Republican National
Committee on fund-raising. But
he still faces
hurdles winning support from
party leaders.
House Speaker Paul Ryan has so
far refused
an endorsement. He's scheduled
to meet with
Trump on Thursday.
Ryan spoke this afternoon in an
online interview
with The Wall Street Journal:
REP. PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker
of the House:
The point I have been making is,
we shouldn't
just pretend that our party is
unified, when
we know it is not.
And so I think what we want to
do is sit down
together and talk about how we
can unify the
Republican Party, so that we can
be at full
strength in the fall, because if
we just pretend
we're unified, without actually
unifying,
then we will be at half-strength
in the fall,
and that won't go well for us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Trump's former
rival Ted Cruz
also declined today to say if
he'd back the
presumptive nominee. The Texas
senator's name
is still on the ballot in
Nebraska, but he
played down the chance that a
victory there
might prompt him to reenter the
race.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R), Texas:
Listen, we have
suspended the campaign. We have
suspended
the campaign because I can see
no viable path
to victory. Of course, if that
changed, we
would reconsider things. But
let's be clear.
We are not going to win Nebraska
today. There
should be no mystery, no
excitement in that.
We have withdrawn from the
campaign and it's
in the hands of the voters. If
circumstances
change, we will always assess
changed circumstances.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the Democratic
side, Hillary
Clinton stumped in Kentucky,
next door to
West Virginia. She called for
paying child
care workers more, while curbing
child care
costs for families.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
I don't think any family should
have to pay
more than 10 percent of their
income for child
care. That ought to be just a
rule, and you
ought to get help if you're
getting too close
to that or going above that. So,
we need to
start thinking about family
issues as investment
issues, investments in the
future, investment
in our children.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Clinton's rival,
Bernie Sanders,
pressed ahead with his underdog
campaign in
a California city still
suffering from the
housing market meltdown in 2008.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
When you have this grotesque
level of income
and wealth inequality, when you
have a situation
where, over the last 25 years,
trillions of
dollars have left the hands of
working families
and have gone into the top
one-tenth of 1
percent, don't tell me we don't
have the resources
to rebuild Stockton, California.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: California's
delegate-rich
contest, almost at the end of
the Democrats'
primary calendar, is set for
June 7.
Sanders has vowed to take his
campaign all
the way to the Democratic
Convention in Philadelphia
in late July.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the day's
other news:
The people of Central and
Southern Oklahoma
surveyed the damage and began
recovery operations
after a barrage of tornadoes.
Two people were
killed by separate storms that
struck near
the town to the south of
Oklahoma City.
Storm chasers captured footage
of the twisters,
one reportedly up to a
mile-wide. The twisters
ripped through homes, tossed
cars aside and
scattered debris for miles.
The fire that swept through Fort
McMurray,
Canada, is still burning, but
it's moved away
from the city, and repairs are
beginning.
Officials and journalists toured
the area
yesterday, and found some blocks
were burned
to their foundations, destroying
2,400 buildings.
But about 90 percent of the town
survived
intact. Still, it will be weeks
before nearly
90,000 evacuees are allowed to
return.
Meanwhile, oil sands companies
are trying
to resume production, but many
staffers and
suppliers are displaced.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama
will become
the first sitting U.S. president
to visit
Hiroshima, Japan, when he
travels to Asia
later this month.
The United States carried out
the world's
first atomic bombing on
Hiroshima in August
1945. It's estimated that
140,000 people were
killed.
Spokesman Josh Earnest announced
the visit
today, but said the president
doesn't plan
to offer an apology while he's
there.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary:
The president intends the visit
to send a
much more forward-looking signal
about his
ambition for realizing the goals
of a planet
without nuclear weapons. This
also is an opportunity
for the visit to highlight the
remarkable
transformation in the
relationship between
Japan and the United States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The president's
week-long visit
to Asia will include a Group of
Seven summit
in Japan and a stop in Vietnam.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In North
Korea, a mass,
tightly choreographed parade
capped the first
ruling party Congress in nearly
40 years.
Hundreds of thousands gathered
in Pyongyang's
main square with floats and
patriotic banners
to pay tribute to the country's
leader, Kim
Jong-un. After nightfall,
torchbearers formed
designs and phrases, including
one that read
"The Nuclear-Powered State."
JUDY WOODRUFF: The United States
Navy staged
a new challenge today to China's
sweeping
claims in the South China Sea,
and Beijing
scrambled fighter jets in
response. A U.S.
guided missile destroyer sailed
within 12
nautical miles of Fiery Cross
Reef, now occupied
by the Chinese.
LU KANG, Chinese Foreign
Ministry Spokesman
(through translator): This is
out and out
a military challenge to the new
marine order.
The United States has flexed its
military
muscles by sending warships and
military planes
close to and even into the
related islands
and reefs and their surrounding
sea and airspace
for provocation.
This is but the biggest threat
to the peace
and stability and the freedom of
navigation
and flight on the South China
Sea.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Secretary of
State John Kerry
brushed aside the Chinese
objections, saying
again that the U.S. is
determined to maintain
freedom of navigation.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Also today, a
Chinese labor
panel ruled against a fired
worker in the
country's first transgender job
bias case.
The claimant argued he was let
go unfairly
for living as a man when he was
born a woman.
The arbitration panel granted
$62 in back
wages, but found the employer
broke no laws.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in this
country, the U.S.
Justice Department has opted not
to seek the
death penalty for the alleged
mastermind in
the attacks on U.S. diplomats in
Benghazi,
Libya. Ahmed Abu Khattala was
captured in
Libya two years ago, and brought
to the U.S.
He's charged with murder and
supporting terrorists.
The U.S. ambassador and three
other Americans
were killed in the attacks in
2012. Militants
stormed a U.S. compound and a
CIA complex.
HARI SREENIVASAN: A Baltimore
police officer
chose today to go before a judge
rather than
a jury in the Freddie Gray case.
Edward Nero
is charged with assault,
reckless endangerment
and misconduct in office. He was
involved
in arresting Gray, who died of
injuries in
custody, touching off riots. The
first case
resulting from the arrest ended
in a hung
jury.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On Wall Street,
stocks had
their biggest day since March,
boosted in
part by China's efforts to
stimulate its economy.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 222
points to close at 17928. The
Nasdaq rose
59 points and the S&P 500 added
25.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And another
year, another
White House visit for the
University of Connecticut
women's basketball team.
President Obama welcomed
the Huskies today to celebrate
their fourth
straight national title and the
school's 11
overall. The president said
UConn has defied
the old saying that you can't
win all of the
time.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
change in
the Philippines -- voters elect
a controversial
new president; the educational
benefits of
preschoolers interacting with
senior citizens;
an organization that's training
people to
talk about race; and much more.
The man who will next lead the
Philippines
was lauded as a no-nonsense
tough guy and
derided as a looming dictator
throughout a
fiery election campaign.
Today, it became clear, after
his two closest
rivals conceded, that, whatever
the labels,
Rodrigo Duterte will soon be
called Mr. President.
With China flexing its muscles
in the South
China Sea, the United States is
looking to
deepen its security relationship
with Manila,
while Duterte has said his
priorities are
to lift up the large numbers of
Filipinos
in poverty and crack down on
crime.
Rodrigo Duterte is known for his
tough talk
and bombastic style, but he was
decidedly
more humble on a pre-dawn trip
today to his
parents' tomb in Manila. Social
media video
showed him sobbing as he said,
"Help me, mom.
I'm just a nobody."
That may once have been true,
but Monday's
election has now catapulted
Duterte to president-elect.
He won about 40 percent of the
vote, pledging
to eliminate poverty, corruption
and crime.
The outcome delighted supporters
in Davao
City, where he's long been
mayor.
MAN (through translator): I am
happy and feel
privileged. The mayor prevailed.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Duterte's path
to the presidency
was anything but conventional,
featuring crude
sex jokes, which included making
light of
the rape and murder of an
Australian woman,
and incendiary rhetoric,
especially about
criminals.
RODRIGO DUTERTE, Philippines
President-Elect:
All of you who are into drugs,
you sons of
(EXPLETIVE DELETED).
(LAUGHTER)
RODRIGO DUTERTE: I will really
kill you. I
have no patience for that. I
have no middle
ground there. Either you kill
me, or I will
kill you idiots.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That kind of
talk has led
some to draw comparisons to
Donald Trump,
the presumptive Republican
presidential nominee
in the U.S.
Karen Lema is a Manila
correspondent for Reuters,
who spoke with us via Google
Hangouts.
KAREN LEMA, Reuters: I think
it's probably
because of their unconventional
ways, their
unorthodox ways. Here, people
tend to look
at those that are in the
political establishment
as weak, inefficient and
corrupt. And, again,
Duterte I think has successfully
differentiated
himself from the pack. And
that's where his
appeal lie.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Duterte
inherits a Philippine
economy that grew an average of
6.2 percent
over the past six years. But
with nearly a
third of the population still
below the poverty
line, voters said they were
ready for change.
MAN (through translator): We
need someone
who can make the prices of goods
go down,
so that for us who are poor, we
can make a
better living.
WOMAN (through translator): I
hope, whoever
becomes the president, they will
help the
homeless, provide work for our
husbands and
run the Philippines well.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Today, a
Duterte spokesman
laid out plans to federalize the
government.
Karen Lema says it's a bid to
help neglected
regions far removed from the
country's power
center.
KAREN LEMA: He want to devolve
functions away
from Central Manila to the
provinces. He wanted
to empower these provinces and
make sure that
the wealth is more evenly
distributed. And,
like he said, he wants to
benefit what he
calls the -- those who have been
left behind.
HARI SREENIVASAN: On foreign
policy, Duterte
has said he'd talk to China
about its expanding
claims and military activity in
the South
China Sea. But, if nothing
changed, he said
he'd sail to one of Beijing's
new artificial
islands and plant the Philippine
flag.
Today, China's Foreign Ministry
voiced hope
for progress with the new
leader.
LU KANG, Chinese Foreign
Ministry Spokesman
(through translator): China and
the Philippines
have a traditional friendship.
We indeed hope
that the new government of the
Philippines
would meet China halfway, taking
concrete
measures to properly deal with
the disputes.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Duterte has
also expressed
wariness about closer security
ties with the
U.S., but, yesterday, he called
for talks
to include the U.S., Japan and
Australia.
RODRIGO DUTERTE: I do not think
that anybody
now is interested in getting to
war. And so
we are allied with America. We
will agree
to a multilateral participation,
if there
is one coming.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In Washington,
a White House
spokesman said today -- quote --
"We look
forward to strengthening and
deepening ties
with the Philippines."
But, policy questions aside,
Duterte's hard-line
approach has sparked concerns
that he could
be a dictator in the making in a
country with
an authoritarian past.
In 1972, President Ferdinand
Marcos declared
martial law in the Philippines,
and ruled
unchallenged for years. He was
ousted in 1986
by Corazon Aquino, the widow of
a fierce Marcos
critic, and she became
president.
Now her son Benigno Aquino is
leaving office
after serving the single
six-year term allowed
under the country's
constitution. He opposed
Duterte and instead backed
former Interior
Secretary Mar Roxas. Aquino also
campaigned
against Ferdinand Marcos Jr.,
who trailed
by a narrow margin in the vice
presidential
race.
In a statement today, Aquino
said, "Our people
have spoken and their verdict is
accepted
and respected."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now back to the
presidential
campaign.
Donald Trump may be the
presumptive Republican
nominee, but he still has
considerable work
to do to bring essential
elements of the GOP
and the conservative movement on
board to
support him.
To explore that, we are joined
now by two
Republicans, Ken Cuccinelli, who
until last
week served as delegate
operations director
for the Ted Cruz campaign, and
Corey Stewart,
Virginia state campaign chair
for Donald Trump.
And, gentlemen, we welcome you
both to the
program.
Ken Cuccinelli, let me start
with you.
You worked your heart out for
Ted Cruz. He
dropped out. He is now today
saying he's ruling
out a third-party bid. Where
does this leave
you?
KENNETH CUCCINELLI (R), Former
Virginia Attorney
General: Well, you know, we were
15-1, but
you have to go undefeated to be
the nominee.
And it's disappointing.
Sometimes, I wonder if I'm
watching my country
commit political suicide. But,
you know, there
is five months until the
election, and we
will see how things go at the
convention and
we will see where things go
between now and
November.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, he didn't
entirely today,
we noticed, rule out getting
back in the race.
Do you think that's a
possibility?
KENNETH CUCCINELLI: Not -- not
realistically,
no. I think that was more along
the lines
of a statement of, if an
asteroid hits New
York City and Donald Trump is
dead, then I
will get back in the race.
But, short of that, no, this
race is -- we
have hit the point where Trump
is going to
hit the 1,237 mark and get over
the majority
needed to be the nominee, and so
that's what
I expect is going to happen. We
still have
other things to do. There's
always a debate
about the platform. What does it
-- on an
ideal day, what does it mean to
be a Republican?
And we also want to recover --
and I think
this is an area where Cruz and
Trump delegates
may have a lot in common -- we
want to recover
these rules back from the
establishment and
return them much more to the
grassroots than
they have been structured today
and than they
have been for decades.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes, and I do
want to ask you
about that in a moment.
But, Corey Stewart, let me turn
to you. What
do you say? You have been
supporting Donald
Trump for months now. What do
you say to conservatives
who are still struggling with
whether or not
Donald Trump is really a
conservative who
believes what they do?
COREY STEWART, Trump Campaign
Virginia State
Chairman: Well, he is a
conservative. We stand
by a conservative platform at
the convention.
If the Cruz supporters would
like to strengthen
it, we will support that. In
fact, there are
some parts of the platform we
would like to
make stronger, especially on
illegal immigration.
And I think where there could be
some disagreement
is perhaps on international
trade. We don't
feel that the TPP, or the TTIP,
or some of
the past international trade
agreements have
been fair to American workers
and American
small businesses.
But, overall, I think we are
going to have
a lot of agreement with other
conservatives
in the party.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it's
interesting you
point those things out,,
because, as you know,
in the last few days, there has
been a lot
of attention on some of Mr.
Trump's statements.
People are saying, well, just
how conservative
is he, because he's come out
with positions
on trade, on issues like Social
Security where
-- that really not I think what
people view
as part of the conservative
orthodoxy?
How do you -- how are you,
yourself, how comfortable
are you when you hear him, say,
take positions
where aren't necessarily where
maybe you thought
conservatives were?
COREY STEWART: Well, I think
there is a question,
well, what is conservative?
I mean, Donald Trump, he is
pro-life. He's
conservative on the social
issues. He's conservative
on taxation. He's conservative
on releasing,
you know -- on deregulation and
making it
easier for small business
people. So, I mean,
but, look, if we attack some of
these agreements,
TTIP and TPP, that are hollowing
out the manufacturing
sector in America...
JUDY WOODRUFF: These are some of
the agreements
the Obama administration has
worked on.
COREY STEWART: Right, some of
the international
trade agreements that are really
hurting American
workers.
And what is -- I don't consider
that conservative
or liberal. It's just common
sense. We need
to protect our own workers and
our own businesses.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ken Cuccinelli,
how conservative
is Donald Trump?
KENNETH CUCCINELLI: Well, I
mean, I appreciate
Corey's comments, but I don't
think it's really
accurate to characterize him as
a conservative.
This is someone who has spoken
about higher
taxes and higher minimum wage
being enforced
from the federal level. And
maybe he is supportive
today of socially conservative
positions,
but it's hard to have a lot of
faith in that,
given the history.
And so it's one of those things
where actions
are going to speak louder than
some words,
and that's going to take some
time to see
and to develop, and as the
campaign progresses.
So we will -- you know, a lot of
us are just
hanging back, not casting
judgment on him
as a nominee at this point.
But, as I told Corey Lewandowski
when I talked
to him this weekend, is, we
really want the
see overlap on positions and on
beliefs and
some credibility put behind
those positions,
that we can rely on them. This
is a -- to
put it in Trump-ese, this is the
deal. You
want me to vote for you, and
that comes first.
And what I get is the positions
when you're
president. That comes second.
And so there's no taking my vote
back in November.
So, in addition to taking
conservative positions,
not just calling things
conservative and declaring
it to be so, actual movement
conservative
positions, then you have got to
back it up.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
KENNETH CUCCINELLI: And one good
way to back
it up is with personnel who you
say is going
to implement any particular
given policy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I should say,
Corey Lewandowski
being the campaign manager.
COREY STEWART: The other Corey.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The other Corey
in all this.
KENNETH CUCCINELLI: Yes, yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, Corey
Stewart, what about
the points that we just heard
from Ken Cuccinelli,
that Mr. Trump has made
statements about higher
taxes on the wealthy, on raising
the minimum
wage? I mean, are those
positions you think
he's going to stay with?
COREY STEWART: Well, I think
what you're going
the find is, Donald Trump is
going to be a
lot more conservative than the
Republican
Party has been in the past.
Take illegal immigration. The
party has said
for years and years that they're
for a secure
border, but no presidential
candidate has
-- on the Republican side has
taken such a
strong position on both internal
enforcement
of our immigration laws and on
the border.
And the reason he's doing that
and the reason
he's doing so well among
blue-collar workers
-- and he's tied with Hillary
Clinton in Pennsylvania,
something no Republican
candidate has done
in recent history -- is because
he's doing
this to protect American workers
and American
jobs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you're saying
that it's
OK if he takes some of these
other positions
when it comes to minimum wage,
when it comes
to higher taxes on the wealthy,
because he's
expanding the pie, so to speak,
of the voters
he can attract to vote for him
in the Republican
Party?
COREY STEWART: Well, I think the
important
thing to recognize is that he is
anti-tax.
He's going to keep taxes low on
business.
He understands, as a
businessperson, that
for business will thrive in
America, one,
you have got to protect it from
unfair trade
practices from China and
elsewhere.
Two, you have got to have low
taxation. You
have got to have low regulation.
He's for
all of those things. And he's
also for protecting
American jobs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, if that's the
case, Ken
Cuccinelli, is that a package
that you can
-- a deal, I should say, that
you can live
with?
KENNETH CUCCINELLI: Yes, if all
of those things
hold up, I think that's going
the make a lot
of conservatives a lot more
comfortable.
I think the challenge is that a
lot of us
in the last 10 months feel like
those positions
have waxed and waned and come
and gone and
changed today and been different
tomorrow.
And we're going to want to see
some consistency
through the battle now with
Hillary Clinton
without moving those positions,
along the
lines of what you heard Corey
just describe.
That kind of consistency is one
way that he
can start to make conservatives
comfortable
pulling the lever for Donald
Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Corey
Stewart, do you
expect Donald Trump will be
consistent on
these things?
COREY STEWART: Absolutely. He
is.
If you go back to interviews of
Donald Trump
from back in the 1980s, he's
been talking
about a stronger border. He's
about being better to business
and protecting
American workers since the
1980s. He's as
constant as the Northern Star on
these issues.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I want to...
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ken Cuccinelli,
you -- you're
laughing now. Why?
KENNETH CUCCINELLI: Look, I
appreciate what
Corey Stewart has to say, but
consistency
has not been a hallmark when it
comes to policy
of Donald Trump.
I mean, take taxes. Take minimum
wage. Take
abortion. Take gay marriage.
It's a long and
varying list. And even
immigration, where
he made his first mark in the
presidential
campaign, is not -- he is not
today -- and
I basically appreciate where I
think he is
today -- in the same place where
he has been
in the past.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And is this just
quickly, just
quickly, Ken Cuccinelli,
something you plan
to argue at the convention rules
committee?
KENNETH CUCCINELLI: No. No.
I think that Corey's point about
platform
and strengthening the party
position on illegal
immigration is one there will be
a lot of
agreement on. But let's face it.
The platform
is a statement of ideals and
principles. Will
they be acted on? And I think in
the area
of...
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, I need to...
KENNETH CUCCINELLI: ... illegal
immigration,
I have the most confidence in
Donald Trump.
It's the other areas where I
wonder more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes, I just --
literally two
words on whether -- it looks
like you're going
to come to some agreement at the
convention.
COREY STEWART: We are. We're
going to have
an agreement.
JUDY WOODRUFF: OK.
COREY STEWART: There's going to
be a strong
conservative coalition coming
together in
November to defeat Hillary.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right.
Corey Stewart, Ken Cuccinelli,
thank you both.
KENNETH CUCCINELLI: Good to be
with you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A new report due
out later
this week from the National
Institute on Early
Education Research finds that a
number of
states are struggling to find
ways to improve
access to high quality
pre-kindergarten.
Tonight, we look at a unique
approach taken
by a preschool in Seattle,
Washington. It's
giving children life lessons
that go beyond
the classroom, and providing a
unique opportunity
to seniors.
Special correspondent Cat Wise
has our report.
It's part of our Making the
Grade series on
education that airs every
Tuesdays.
MARY MCGOVERN, Senior Citizen:
What do you
see?
CHILD: A brown bear.
CAT WISE: Mary McGovern is 95
years old, and
one of her favorite things to do
is read to
toddlers.
MARY MCGOVERN: And what is that?
A bird.
CHILD: A bird.
MARY MCGOVERN: A bird. What
color is the bird?
CHILDREN: Red.
MARY MCGOVERN: Red. Everybody
knows that.
CAT WISE: Luckily for Mary, she
doesn't need
to go any further than down the
hall to find
her young friends.
MARY MCGOVERN: Oh, see, look in
here is the
little kids in there.
CAT WISE: Oh, yes.
McGovern lives at Providence
Mount St. Vincent,
a nursing home in Seattle,
Washington, that
also houses a day care for
children up to
5 years of age.
WOMAN: Thank you, honey. Thank
you. There
you go. Thank you very much.
CAT WISE: Every weekday, 500
residents are
joined by 125 children in the
facility affectionately
called The Mount.
MAN: Peekaboo.
WOMAN: Peekaboo.
MAN: I see you.
Administrator Charlene Boyd:
CHARLENE BOYD, Regional
Administrator, Providence
Mount St. Vincent: We wanted to
create a place
for people to come to live, and
not come to
die.
CAT WISE: So, in 1991, Boyd and
other administrators
added a high-quality preschool
to the nursing
home and created an
intergenerational learning
center, a community for the very
old and very
young.
Why is there is this railing
here?
CHARLENE BOYD: This railing is
here not for
the kids, but it's here for
residents. And
it's a safety piece for a
resident in a wheelchair
to push themselves up and to
hold on and to
bring themselves to a standing
position and
watch the children through the
window.
CAT WISE: So, they can stand
here and look
in?
CHARLENE BOYD: They can stand
here and look
in.
It's putting high-quality child
care in a
setting that link old and young
together,
making the magic between these
two ages together,
bringing joy to the residents
and joy to those
young children. It's just like
this magical
formula that happens every day.
WOMAN: Can I get a high-five?
There. He knows
how to do a high-five.
MARY MCGOVERN: Most of them,
they're curious
about me. Why are you here? I
tell them I'm
here because, when I was living
in my house,
when I got too old, I wasn't
always walking
straight, and sometimes I would
fall. And
if fell, I had to have some help
to get up,
because I couldn't get off the
floor.
I want to hug your baby doll.
MAUREEN MCGOVERN, Daughter of
Mary McGovern:
I think there are things that
both parties
take away from the interactions.
It's not
like a lifelong relationship,
but just for
that moment in time, they're
both enjoying
each other's company, and
getting something
out of their relationship with
that person
in that moment.
MARY MCGOVERN: Give me a hug.
Come on.
CHARLENE BOYD: All of us have
common needs
to be recognized. All of us have
to be loved, and all of us have
common needs
to share life together. And so
these children
bring life and vibrancy and
normalcy. It's
a gift. It's a gift in exposing
young families
to positive aspects of aging,
and it's a gift
of also having children seeing
frailty, normalcy
and that's part of that full
circle of life.
(SINGING)
CAT WISE: Intergenerational
activities can
be spontaneous or planned, like
this sing-a-long.
MARIE HOOVER, Providence Mount
St. Vincent:
There's 36 visit possible each
week, so each
classroom, six classrooms, has
at least three
visits, up to six visits.
CAT WISE: The director of the
center, Marie
Hoover, says children become
comfortable with
elderly residents at an early
age.
MARIE HOOVER: Whether they're in
a wheelchair,
or in a walker, or maybe they're
hard to understand,
or you have to speak louder, it
is just about
who that individual is, and they
adjust. The
kids just don't -- they really
don't blink
an eye. This is normal. This is
just who this
resident is.
CAT WISE: Ninety-three-year-old
Harriet Thompson
joined this sing-a-long on her
way to the
dining hall.
HARRIET THOMPSON, Senior
Citizen: I usually
like to go sit down for a while
before dinner,
but I heard them singing, so in,
we went.
CAT WISE: What do you experience
internally
when you're around these
children?
HARRIET THOMPSON: Happiness,
just plain old
happiness. You know, yes, it
beats anything
else. Beats television.
CHARLENE BOYD: Boredom and
loneliness at sort
of the plagues of older adults.
There's nothing
more delightful than seeing
young children
with noise, with laughter. You
see the residents,
and they hear the sound of the
kids coming
down the hall, and it's as
though sunlight
just came through the window.
HARRIET THOMPSON: I'm a
great-great-grandmother,
but they're in another town. I
can't hold
my own little girl because she's
far away.
And so this is what makes me
happy. You get
to know them, and watch them,
and act silly
with them. And it's good to feel
like you're
3 years old again.
CAT WISE: Teachers see
similarities in the
ways these two very different
age groups communicate.
MARIE HOOVER: The brain of a
toddler, and
as somebody is beginning to
have, you know,
some signs of dementia, the
brains are similar,
and their development, or their
decline, is
similar.
CAT WISE: That was apparent in
this art class,
where resident John Goss, a
retired surgeon,
and 5-year-old William Kraynek
(ph) teamed
up as painting partners.
JOHN GOSS, Senior Citizen: This
is a junk
brush?
CHILD: A giant.
JOHN GOSS: Giant, yes.
He's operating on my plain, and
I'm operating
on his plain, and so we have an
attachment.
He helped me, and we were
working together.
CHILD: I used blue, and he used
blue, and
I used green, and he used green.
JOHN GOSS: It's wonderfully fun,
because things
come out of your hand, rather
than your mouth.
MARIE HOOVER: The kids are
certainly of that
age where this there isn't this
sense of,
oh, that's weird or something to
be scared
of, and I think that's happening
on both sides
of the age.
CHILD: What's your name?
ANNIE CARTER, Senior Citizen:
Annie Carter.
CAT WISE: Later the same day,
William Kraynek
visited the skilled nursing
section of The
Mount to help make sandwiches
for the homeless.
CHILD: I had three sandwiches.
ANNIE CARTER: Oh, I see.
CAT WISE: Here, William
partnered with 92-year-old
Annie Carter.
ANNIE CARTER: We just talk about
our work,
just like anybody else on a job.
That's our
job, so we have to do the right
thing.
WOMAN: This is Alex.
Hi, Alex.
MAN: How you doing?
WOMAN: Hi.
CAT WISE: How do the children
deal with difficult
situations, like a resident that
might be
declining or even death? How do
the children
deal with those situations?
MARIE HOOVER: Developmentally,
it's not really
something they can
conceptualize. Even our
oldest kids, at 5, kids don't
quite get that
whole death concept.
If the kids bring that up to the
teachers,
then the teacher's response is
going to be,
I miss Mary too. What's your
favorite memory
about what she did?
And those are the kinds of
things they're
going to focus in on, as opposed
to somebody
died. They're just not quite
ready to get
that concept.
CAT WISE: Child care at The
Mount is competitively
priced with similar high quality
preschools
in the area. Currently, 400
families are on
the wait list.
Administrators believe The
Mount's model can
be replicated across the
country, and they
expect interest to peak this
summer, when
a documentary featuring their
work called
"Present Perfect" is released.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Cat
Wise in Seattle.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
mining operation
that environmentalists say is
threatening
the Land of 10,000 Lakes.
But, first, we turn to our on
going series
Race Matters.
Last night, documentary film
maker Ken Burns
received the nation's highest
honor for intellectual
achievement in the humanities.
He delivered
the annual Jefferson Lecture at
the Kennedy
Center, his focus, race in
America.
Here, he addresses recent
killings of young
African-Americans.
KEN BURNS, Documentary
Filmmaker: Like the
amputated limb felt long after
it has been
cut off, I miss Trayvon Martin.
I was once
a 17-year-old who wore a hooded
sweatshirt
walking through unfamiliar
neighborhoods,
but I was never gunned down.
I miss Tamir Rice too. I was 11
once and played
with plastic guns, but no cop
ever shot me.
We are missing many hundreds, if
not thousands,
of African-Americans, lost only
because of
the color of their skin in just
the last decade.
Most of the occurrences we
documented in our
recent Jackie Robinson film, as
Brough (ph)
said -- he crossed the color
line, by the
way, 69 years ago last month --
are happening
again in our present day:
Confederate Flag
issues, driving while black,
stop and frisk,
burned black churches,
integrated suburban
swimming pool problems, housing
bias, racial
taunts, cynical political
calculations that
ignore African-Americans, and a
version of
Black Lives Matter, to name just
a few.
I do not believe, ladies and
gentlemen, there
is a hell, as most of our
religions reliably
report, just the one we humans
make for ourselves
and each other right here.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now we
continue with "NewsHour"
special correspondent Charlayne
Hunter-Gault's
ongoing look at solutions to
America's enduring
race problem.
Tonight, she talks with Reverend
David Billings
of the People's Institute for
Survival and
Beyond, an organization that
assists other
groups trying to overcome racism
and its impact.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: We
caught up with
Reverend Billings at one of his
organization's
workshops in New Orleans,
Louisiana, where
he and other trainers discuss
their work against
racism there and around the
country.
WOMAN: We need to be continuing
to do this
organizing work.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: The
institute has
conducted over a half-million
workshops with
organizations and institutions
ranging from
hospitals, local and regional
government,
to prisons and churches, all
dealing with
how to identify and combat
racism.
Reverend Billings, thank you for
joining us.
REV. DAVID BILLINGS, People's
Institute for
Survival and Beyond: Well, it's
my honor.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Your
organization
is over 30 years old, and it was
founded to
combat racism, among other
things. How do
you define racism?
REV. DAVID BILLINGS: We define
it as race
prejudice, plus power.
Individual racism, like how we
feel about
each other and what we might
call each other,
is just a byproduct of an
arrangement that
goes all the way back before the
nation's
founding.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: What do
you mean?
REV. DAVID BILLINGS: One of the
founders'
greatest fears was that poor
Europeans who'd
come over here as indentured,
there was a
great a fear that they would
join up with
the Africans who were being
enslaved and indigenous
people and overthrow before they
even got
started.
So, it would be the creation of
race that
will compromise poor and what we
today we'd
call working-class whites. And
it makes us
hesitant, has always made us
hesitant to organize
with people of color, especially
black people.
This country constantly and
still does treats
racism as it were just a matter
of personal
relationships. And it's not, you
know? That's
why so many of us who are white
can say, well,
I'm not racist, you know, I have
got friends
who are black, all the sort of
things.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: But
there were Civil
Rights Act, Voting Rights Act.
Didn't that
change things a little bit?
REV. DAVID BILLINGS: Oh, it
changed -- you
know, they had great impact, the
Voting Rights
Act and everything, but we have
to -- we are
fighting today to preserve it.
At the People's Institute, I
will speak to
people that are white like me.
There's a bitterness,
there's an anger about equal
rights, you know?
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: You
experience that?
People tell you that?
REV. DAVID BILLINGS: Oh, yes.
Oh, yes.
When we first started, no
systems were asking
us to work with them. None of
the great systems
like universities or hospitals
or health care
would even admit that racism was
an issue
for them.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Tell me
what you and
your organization are doing.
REV. DAVID BILLINGS: We get
invited now to
be a part of symposiums, to be a
part of long-term
organizing effort within --
given large systems
to work with them for a period
of months,
even years, to analyze how race
and racism
is impacting their outcomes,
their work.
And it's taking off all around
the country.
We start off, usually, with a
small group
of people within a larger system
who say,
we want to go through one of the
undoing racism
workshops, because the purpose
of the undoing
racism workshop is to eventually
be the foundation
for a longer organizing effort
within the
institution, understanding
racism, its history,
you know, its impact today, and
how the nation
is as it changes, how the racism
begins to
resist the structural racism,
begins to resist
societal change.
We do an ongoing community
organizing/undoing
racism workshop, because it
takes us a year
or two to cover, say, hundreds
of people in
the schools of social work of
New York City,
and we work with every one of
them.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: And you
find that
these people don't know about
race?
REV. DAVID BILLINGS: Yes.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: And what
do you find?
REV. DAVID BILLINGS: What we
find is that
people understand race, but they
don't understand
organizing.
You can't teach racism away. A
lot of us think
you can. You can't legislate it
away, as important
as the Voting Rights Act and
things like that
are. There's not one institution
in this country
where they can say: There's no
racism here.
We have solved it.
I come out of the church. You
would think
the church would be in the lead
around tackling
racism.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Are
white churches
doing what they should be doing?
I know we're
generalizing, but in general?
REV. DAVID BILLINGS: Very few.
Very few, maybe
less than there were a
generation ago.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: I think
just about
everybody agrees there's a very
toxic atmosphere
today. Are you getting more
people coming
to you or fewer?
REV. DAVID BILLINGS: Yes, we are
getting more.
But I -- I hear your question.
It's usually,
like, people will say, well,
you're speaking
to the choir. And we say, yes,
but the choir
has to practice every Wednesday
night, you
know? That's what you got to do.
You got to
keep going at it.
And if we're to confront the
racism that is
out there in this country, we
have to -- to
have our act together. We have
got to know
what we are doing.
We're hopeful. You have got to
stay hopeful
to do this work.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So,
what's the solution?
REV. DAVID BILLINGS: You have
got to keep
the work going. You have got to
transfer it.
I'm other -- hopeful is that --
see, white
kids need to be taught very
early on. We have
to quit protecting white people,
even white
children, about the realities of
race in this
country. You know, children are
very conscious
and in tune with things being
fair. You will
hear, that's not fair. You know,
we're talking
a brother and sister.
Well, those children are --
could be -- you
know, will understand race. They
will understand
all of these things. They are
not given the
opportunity because we protect
our children
as whites, you know, that that
will somehow
make them feel bad. I think
it'll make them
feel good, because it'll help
them explain
some things.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Well,
Reverend Billings,
thank you for joining us.
REV. DAVID BILLINGS: Thank you
for having
me.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You can see
more our Race
Matters reporting on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
Plus, tune in later tonight. On
"Point Taken,"
they explore the question,
should the U.S.
pay reparations to
African-Americans?
JUDY WOODRUFF: We head now to
Northern Minnesota,
where new technology has renewed
a battle
over mining a vast mineral
deposit.
From Iowa Public TV's program
"Market to Market,"
Joshua Buettner has the story.
JOSH BUETTNER: Last fall,
demonstrators pressured
Minnesota's Saint Louis County
Board to publicly
acknowledge a proposed
copper-nickel sulfide
mine would threaten the health
of their local
watershed.
WOMAN: It's crazy to clean the
river, only
to allow it to be polluted
again.
MAN: Mining is less than 1
percent of Minnesota's
economy.
JOSH BUETTNER: Opponents allege
newly unearthed
sulfur-bearing rock will create
acid mine
drainage, diluting previous
efforts to restore
the Saint Louis River, a
waterway once crippled
by iron ore pollution.
Since 2008, applications to
conduct exploratory
drilling have surged in the Land
of 10,000
Lakes. And Toronto, Canada-based
PolyMet Mining
Corporation is first in line to
unlock precious
metals from the Duluth complex,
a vast mineral
deposit in the Arrowhead of
Minnesota.
Mining proponents say geologists
have known
about the formation for over 60
years, but
new technology will allow
excavation of four
billion tons of raw material
worth an estimated
$1 trillion.
LATISHA GIETZEN, Director of
Public Affairs,
PolyMet: It's kind of a closed
loop system.
JOSH BUETTNER: Latisha Gietzen,
director of
public affairs for PolyMet, says
new mining
techniques and rehabilitated
infrastructure
will mitigate past damages.
LATISHA GIETZEN: Because we're
using a Legacy
site, we will actually be able
to clean up
some of the issues that are
currently going
on and bring modern technology
to the process.
JOSH BUETTNER: Additionally,
corporate officials
say any water released from
their proposed
NorthMet site will be treated to
meet state
and federal guidelines.
But, for some, the mining
industry's track
record is suspect. A
well-established hub
for agriculture, forestry and
mining exports,
the Port of Duluth sits between
the contested
estuary and Lake Superior. Ships
from North
America's furthest inland port
traditionally
transported taconite, a mineral
used to make
steel, to mills around the Great
Lakes Rust
Belt and the world.
The finite resource is mined
exclusively in
the state's Mesabi Iron Range.
In the 1980s,
two steel making facilities on
the banks of
the Saint Louis River became so
polluted,
they became qualified for EPA's
Superfund
program.
With corporate- and
taxpayer-funded cleanup
continuing today,
environmentalists such as
Aaron Klemm (ph) fear relapse.
MAN: This river has been
designated as one
of the top 10 most endangered
rivers in the
United States.
JOSH BUETTNER: Though the battle
is not over,
the Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources
recently gave its final blessing
to the NorthMet
site.
Natural PolyMet's Latisha
Gietzen says the
company will comply with the new
mining requirements.
LATISHA GIETZEN: It has been
proven that we
can meet water quality
standards, both surface
and ground water, here at the
site. If we
can't show that through
environmental review
and permitting, we won't get a
permit to operate.
JOSH BUETTNER: PolyMet expects
to produce
3.6 billion pounds of copper
equivalent over
20 years.
At 32,000 tons of ore per day,
that's a fraction
of the 100,000 tons of taconite
that once
rolled through daily. But the
bounty on precious
metals far outweighs that of
low-grade ores.
During a decade-long process,
PolyMet has
jumped through various state and
federal hoops
described as the most stringent
in the world.
Project backers say copper and
nickel, chief
components in cell phones,
hybrid car batteries,
solar panels and wind turbines,
are essential
building blocks for a high-tech
clean-energy
future, a future some say the
U.S. should
secure now, before less
climate-minded competitors,
like China, are allowed to
dominate the market.
State senator David Tomassoni
backs the project
and says Minnesota's
environmental regulations
will protect its citizens.
DAVID TOMASSONI, Minnesota State
Senator:
Minnesota's laws are the
strictest in the
country when it comes to the
environment.
And, plus, we live here. We live
here, we
play here, we drink the water,
we breathe
the air. We want this to be done
right, and
it will be done right.
JOSH BUETTNER: PolyMet predicts
roughly 1,000
direct and indirect jobs would
result from
its project, a forecast welcomed
with open
arms by some in a region sapped
by economic
slump.
Adding to layers of complexity,
the NorthMet
mine sits within territory ceded
to the government
by Native Americans. In 1854,
the Lake Superior
Chippewa entered into a treaty,
giving the
U.S. ownership of their lands in
exchange
for hunting, fishing and wild
rice harvesting
rights in perpetuity.
Wild rice is sacred to area
tribes and protected
by law.
Korey Northrup is a member of
the Lake Superior
Chippewa.
KOREY NORTHRUP, Lake Superior
Chippewa: My
main focus is making sure that
the wild rice
is protected. And we need to
understand that,
without water, there will be no
life, including
human life.
(APPLAUSE)
JOSH BUETTNER: PolyMet is
confident it will
meet standards for wild rice.
State Senator David Tomassoni
says there has
to be a happy medium between all
parties.
DAVID TOMASSONI: You worry about
the water,
you worry about the rice, but
you also worry
about the jobs and the
industries.
JOSH BUETTNER: Even though
various national
authorities have given the
go-ahead, those
opposed say corporate profits
and tax revenues
are the only thing PolyMet will
dig up.
MAN: Protect. Don't pollute.
JOSH BUETTNER: And the battle
over risks and
benefits will continue as rivals
work their
way through the scrutiny of
precious metals
development in Northern
Minnesota.
MAN: That's what we want for our
Saint Louis
River.
JOSH BUETTNER: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm
Josh Buettner in Duluth,
Minnesota.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now for our
"NewsHour"
Shares, something that caught
our eye that
we thought might be of interest
to you, too.
In this increasingly fast-paced
world, it
can sometimes be hard to
appreciate the beauty
and complexity of nature. But
one German research
team decided to slow things down
with high-speed
cameras in order to capture the
impressive
gymnastic feats of tree frogs.
The "NewsHour"'s Julia Griffin
explains.
JULIA GRIFFIN: The toe pads of
an Amazon milk
frog can hold up to 14 times the
animal's
body weight. That's like an
average American
man holding a Honda Civic with
his toes.
Amazon milk frogs live in the
trees of South
American rain forests. Like most
tree frogs,
they have adhesive toe pads made
of hexagonal
cells and mucus that allow them
to cling to
surfaces.
Researchers at Kiel University
in Germany
found the frogs can swing from a
branch with
just one toe, which, when it
makes contact,
doesn't slip. The frogs then use
a variety
of acrobatic maneuvers to slow
their momentum.
Having multiple landing
techniques is important,
because missing your mark 30
feet up in the
air could mean death for a tree
frog, though,
sometimes, a belly flop is still
the best
bet.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Julia Griffin.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We can all aspire
to do this.
(LAUGHTER)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yes.
And we have got an update for
you.
Right. She was saying getting
old is a state
of mind. Now she's 91, "badly
crippled, but
I still feel like I'm 15."
And then the question was...
JUDY WOODRUFF: This is
91-year-old Flossie,
whom we featured on the program
the other
night.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yes. And she
was asking
if, in fact, it was going to go
viral. And
it did go viral.
We're pleased to report to you,
Flossie, and
everyone else, our Brief But
Spectacular take
from her has been viewed more
than four million
times on Facebook, proof that a
youthful spirit
is timeless, even on the
Internet.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Flossie Lewis,
you're a star.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yes.
(LAUGHTER)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Also, on the
"NewsHour"
tonight online right now: A
classic American
novel gets a new life as an
opera.
"The Scarlet Letter,"
commissioned in Colorado,
is just one of a wave of new
American operas
to debut in the last few years.
Read more
about how these new productions
are generating
greater interest in the art
form.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, again, the
day's top stories.
Two of the final states in the
presidential
primary season took their turn.
Democrat Bernie
Sanders aimed to win in West
Virginia, but
Republican races in West
Virginia and Nebraska
were a formality, with Donald
Trump virtually
assured of the nomination. Towns
in Central
and Southern Oklahoma began
cleaning up after
tornadoes on Monday that killed
two people
and tore up homes. And Wall
Street rallied,
with the Dow Industrials gaining
more than
220 points.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tune in later
tonight on
"Charlie Rose": Argentina's
foreign minister
on the challenges facing South
America's second
largest economy.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Wednesday, we launch The
Leading Edge,
a new weekly science series. To
kick it off,
travel from San Francisco to
L.A. in 30 minutes.
Miles O'Brien witnesses one of
the first big
tests of Hyperloop technology.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening. For all of us at the
"PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.